Collections expressions: LDM update (#7464)
dotnet/csharplang: meetings/working-groups/collection-literals/CL-LDM-2023-08-14.md

* Changing grouping is a *breaking change*.
* Adding target types is a *breaking change*.

**Question**: Should the first group include all `ref struct` types, not just spans?

**Question**: Should we differentiate between arrays and concrete types? If so, how?

*An array or concrete type is already preferred over an interface if the array or concrete type implements that interface. And if the array or concrete type does not implement the interface, we shouldn't prefer one over the other. Instead, the overload resolution proposal should be: Prefer a span over an array or interface if the iteration type of the span is implicitly convertible to the iteration type of the array or interface.*

## Type inference

*See proposal: [Type inference](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-12.0/collection-expressions.md#type-inference)*

Method type inference involving collection expressions allows inferring the [*iteration type*](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v6/standard/statements.md#1295-the-foreach-statement) of a collection type. There is no support for inferring the containing *collection type*.

> The *iteration type* is defined by `foreach`. If a *collection initializer type* implements `IEnumerable` only, the iteration type is `object`.

Reviewer: Being super nitpicky, a counterexample is where the type implements `IEnumerable` explicitly and also has a GetEnumerator method (which doesn't implement any interface method) which returns a different enumerator type with a different `foreach` element type.

Inferences are made to the iteration type, independently for each element. This is analogous to element inference for *tuples*.

```c#
AsArray([null]);             // error: cannot infer T
AsArray([1, 2, 3]);          // AsArray<int>(int[])
AsListOfArray([[4, 5], []]); // AsListOfArray<int>(List<int[]>)

static T[] AsArray<T>(T[] arg) => arg;
static List<T[]> AsListOfArray<T>(List<T[]> arg) => arg;
```

The [*type inference*](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v6/standard/expressions.md#1163-type-inference) change is handled with a rule for *input type inference* and a corresponding rule for *output type inference*: see [proposal](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-12.0/collection-expressions.md#type-inference).

*Input type inference* is necessary for walking into the element expressions to infer from explicitly-typed lambda parameters, from tuple element types, or from nested collection expressions.
```c#
InputTypeInference([(int y) => { }]); // InputTypeInference<int>()

> static void InputTypeInference<T>(List<Action<T>> x) { }

Reviewer 2: woudl this work with a different delegate tyep from Func/Action?

Author: This doesn't depend on `Action<T>`. A delegate such as `delegate void D<T>(T t);` would work too.

```

*Output type inference* is necessary for inferring from the return type of lambdas and method groups in particular.
```c#
OutputTypeInference([() => 1]);       // OutputTypeInference<int>()

static void OutputTypeInference<T>(List<Func<T>> x) { }
```

## Conversions

*See proposal: [Conversions](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-12.0/collection-expressions.md#conversions)*

There is a *collection expression conversion* from a collection expression to the following types. These represent the valid *target types* for a collection expression.

* single-dimensional arrays
* span types
* types with a [*builder method*](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-12.0/collection-expressions.md#create-methods)

> * generic interfaces implemented by `List<T>`

Reviewer: What if `List<T>` adds a new generic interface implementation?

Author: Added a question, thanks.

* *collection initializer* types

```c#
int[]               a = [1]; // array
ReadOnlySpan<int>   b = [2]; // span
ImmutableArray<int> c = [3]; // builder
IReadOnlyList<int>  d = [4]; // generic list interface
List<int>           e = [5]; // collection initializer
```

For all but collection initializer types, there must be an *implicit conversion* to `T` for each *expression element* in the collection expression, and an *implicit conversion* to `T` for the *iteration type* of each *spread element*.
```c#
string[] a = [x, y, z];
int[] b = [1, null];           // error: cannot convert 'null' to 'int'
ImmutableArray<int> c = [..a]; // error: cannot convert 'string' to 'int'
```

> For collection initializer types, there must be an applicable instance or extension `Add` method for each *expression element* in the collection expression, and an applicable `Add` method for an argument of the *iteration type* of each *spread element*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For collection initializer types, there must be an applicable instance or extension `Add` method for each *expression element* in the collection expression, and an applicable `Add` method for an argument of the *iteration type* of each *spread element*.
```

class MyCollection : IEnumerable
{
    public void Add(int i) { ... }
    public void Add(string s) { ... }
    public IEnumerator GetEnumerator() { ... }
}
```

Collection initializer types that implement `IEnumerable` only, are the one case of a target type without a strongly-typed *iteration type*.

Adding target types is a *breaking change* for overload resolution and type inference.

**Question**: Support `Memory<T>` and `ReadOnlyMemory<T>` as target types?

**Question**: Support *inline array* types? We'd need to validate the collection length at compile for *known length* collections. Would inline arrays be grouped with arrays and concrete types for overload resolution?

## Ref safety

*See proposal: [Ref safety](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-12.0/collection-expressions.md#ref-safety)*

For collection expressions of `ref struct` target types, the compiler *may* allocate the storage for the collection on the callstack when the following hold:
* The collection has a *known length* and is not empty
* The runtime supports *inline array* types
* The collection expression has *local scope*

An empty collection requires no allocation for storage.

> A `ReadOnlySpan<T>`, where `T` is one of several *primitive types*, and that contains constant values only is stored in the assembly data section and does not allocate at the use-site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `ReadOnlySpan<T>`, where `T` is one of several *primitive types* and where the collection expression contains constant values only, is stored in the assembly data section and does not allocate at the use-site.
```
